---
{date: '2006-04-22', explananda: '', title: Aristotle on menstruation and mirrors, tags: aristotle}

---

The other day, "A" challenged me to think of one true thing that Aristotle
said. She was just being silly, of course. Aristotle said lots of true things!
But I'm not sure about this, from Aristotle's <a
href="http://classics.mit.edu/Aristotle/dreams.html">On Dreams</a>:
<blockquote>If a woman chances during her menstrual period to look into a
highly polished mirror, the surface of it will grow cloudy with a
blood-coloured haze. It is very hard to remove this stain from a new mirror,
but easier to remove from an older mirror. As we have said before, the cause of
this lies in the fact that in the act of sight there occurs not only a passion
in the sense organ acted on by the polished surface, but the organ, as an
agent, also produces an action, as is proper to a brilliant object. For sight
is the property of an organ possessing brilliance and colour. The eyes,
therefore, have their proper action as have other parts of the body. Because it
is natural to the eye to be filled with blood-vessels, a woman's eyes, during
the period of menstrual flux and inflammation, will undergo a change, although
her husband will not note this since his seed is of the same nature as that of
his wife. The surrounding atmosphere, through which operates the action of
sight, and which surrounds the mirror also, will undergo a change of the same
sort that occurred shortly before in the woman's eyes, and hence the surface of
the mirror is likewise affected. And as in the case of a garment, the cleaner
it is the more quickly it is soiled, so the same holds true in the case of the
mirror. For anything that is clean will show quite clearly a stain that it
chances to receive, and the cleanest object shows up even the slightest stain.
A bronze mirror, because of its shininess, is especially sensitive to any sort
of contact (the movement of the surrounding air acts upon it like a rubbing or
pressing or wiping); on that account, therefore, what is clean will show up
clearly the slightest touch on its surface. It is hard to cleanse smudges off
new mirrors because the stain penetrates deeply and is suffused to all parts;
it penetrates deeply because the mirror is not a dense medium, and is suffused
widely because of the smoothness of the object. On the other hand, in the case
of old mirrors, stains do not remain because they do not penetrate deeply, but
only smudge the surface.</blockquote>


<h1>Comments</h1>


<br/>
<em>Author:</em> anne
<br/><em>Date:</em> 2006-04-23

Golly. I never noticed that before.

<br/>
<br/>

*******************************************************************************
