---
{date: '2006-07-11', explananda: '', title: Diocles of Carystus and the cucumbers
	of Antioch}

---

This is from an Appendix to the English translation of Jaeger's <i>Aristotle:
Fundamentals of the History of His Development</i>: <blockquote>Diocles' work
on diet was dedicated to a certain Plistarchus. Wellmann never asked who this
man was. Beloch, in a short footnote of his <i>Greek History</i>, asks whether
he was a Macedonian prince, brother of Cassander and one of the younger sons of
Antipater. This is, indeed, highly probable. Antipater was Alexander's man of
confidence, whom he entrusted with the administration of Macedonia and Greece
during the long years of his absence in Asia. Aristotle had met Antipater when
he was the educator of Alexander at King Philip's court, and from that time
until his death Antipater remained his most intimate friend. Aristotle
appointed him in his will as general executor. He and his son Cassander were
the protectors of the Peripatetic school after Alexander's and Aristotle's
deaths. Plistarchus became king of Lycia and Caria after the battle of Ipsus
in 301. Almost all the Hellenistic kings were protectors of science and
philosophy. The dedication of scientific works to princes and other powerful
men is a custom which begins shortly before Alexander's time and throws much
light on the relations of philosophical schools and politics. Moreover, in one
of Diocles' books the cucumbers of of Antioch were recommended. <i>Antioch was
founded in the year 300 B.C. Thus Diocles wrote his book in the third, not in
the beginning of the fourth century</i>.</blockquote>I love the relentless
accumulation of detail, some of it not entirely relevant, building until it
reaches the final, victorious piece of evidence: a reference to a cucumber! My
emotional response to this is, of course, complex: The anti-climax in finding a
cucumber at the end of all this mingles with the excitement of what appears to
be a very nice use of evidence. I am then distracted by Jaeger's use of
italics, which are just so <i>earnest</i> here that the excitement is replaced
by amusement.
