---
{date: '2008-08-09', explananda: '', title: 'Recently read: "The Dark Side"'}

---
<strong>Jane Mayer.  <em>The Dark Side: The Inside Story of How the War on Terror Turned into a War on American Ideals</em></strong>

After the scandal of Abu Grieb, the Bush administration insisted that the torture and abuse of detainees had been the work of a few bad apples.  But of course the abuse was only a manifestation of a much deeper rot, for which top officials bore primary responsibility.  I've sometimes had the impression of similar excuse-making in the attitudes of even some of the fiercest critics of the Bush administration, in the claim that the Bush administration represents a radical and unprecedented break with the past.  It strikes me as naive to depict the Bush administration as a few bad apples, in an otherwise upright tradition legal and ethical conduct.  On the contrary, the Bush administration seems to me part of a larger moral and legal rot that is systemic, and has unfortunately deep roots in American political culture (alongside much more admirable tendencies and traditions).  

Jane Meyer's new book <em>The Dark Side</em> has helped me to reflect on, and to a certain extent, modify, these assumptions.  Mayer is familiar with the <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Church_commission">Church Committee</a>, and with past American abuses of power.  She doesn't base her argument for a significant break with the past on what the Bush administration has done so much as on the legal arguments that the administration has advanced, most often in secrecy, to defend and support its policies.  Much of this <em>is</em> new, and its long-term consequences are likely to be wretched.  

A great deal of the action in Mayer's book is, for this reason, legal.  The new legal doctrines advanced by David Addington, Cheney's legal counsel for the period covered by the book, and John Yoo, among others, were fiercely resisted by other lawyers in the administration.  Meyer meticulously details the legal arguments and maneuvers used by various parties to this debate against the background of events in the so-called War on Terror.  

Mayer book is, as far as I can tell, balanced, careful, and accurate, while rarely engaging in the pointless he-said/she-said style of reporting that so many journalists use to avoid the implications of their reporting.  When an official lies, she points it out, clearly and unequivocally.  A book like this is difficult to ignore, if you care at all about moral and legal issues surrounding torture and the Bush administration's policies.  If even a quarter of the book is accurate, the United States would only need to be a country serious about following its own laws for hundreds of people, from the President on down, to be put on trial for torture and other serious crimes.  
