---
{date: '2009-05-03', explananda: '', title: 'Recently read: A Continent for the Taking', tags: book_reviews}

---
<strong>Howard W. French. <em>A Continent for the Taking: The Tragedy and Hope of Africa</em></strong>

This is an angry book.  On practically every page French has something withering to say about a Western diplomat, or an African leader, or a thug at a checkpoint trying to extort money.  They have all contributed in their own way to the lost opportunities and staggering suffering of a continent with extraordinary potential.  French, an African American born in Washington, D.C., spent more than two decades in Africa, first as a translator and then as a journalist.  He has stories to tell, and a few scores to settle, and in <em>A Continent for the Taking</em> he does both in a compelling way.  His book does not range across the whole of Africa, as the title might suggest.  Rather, French focuses on a few countries where he has significant experiences to relate, among them Nigeria, Liberia, Mali, the Republic of Congo, and the Democratic Republic of the Congo (formerly Zaire).

Perhaps the most gripping and interesting part of the book is French's account of the fall of Mobutu and the rise of Kabila in the DRC in 1997.  French won awards for his reporting on this incident for the New York Times, and he offers more than simply a gripping story about the dissolution and chaos of the end of one regime and the rise of another.  He argues that the United States, attempting to make up for turning a blind eye to the Rwandan genocide three years earlier, again turned a blind eye to Ugandan and Rwandan efforts to use Kabila as a proxy to dominate their much larger neighbour.  French claims that in this they were heavily influenced by the strongly pro-Kagame slant of Philip Gourevitch's <em>We Regret to Inform You that Tomorrow We Will Be Killed With Our Families</em>. (I have occasionally wondered whether subsequent events led Gourevitch to revise his opinion of Kagame; I don't think I've seen anything else on the subject by Gourevitch since I read <em>Regret to Inform</em>).  Unfortunately, backing Kabila at the crucial moment meant backing away from the most credible democratic figure in the DRC.  Once again, the US's involvement in the region was cynical and counterproductive.  The Rwandan and Ugandan invasion-by-proxy of the DRC marked the beginning of an absolutely catastrophic war that claimed the lives of millions.

This book has a lot to recommend it: close observations of people from all walks of life, reflections on the depiction of African issues in the Western media, trenchant critiques of the foreign policies of outside actors in African affairs.  But perhaps the book's greatest virtue is simply that it made me very curious to learn more about the entire continent: about the ancient culture of Mali; the history of Belgium in the Congo; the Ashante and their struggle with the British, and so much more.
