---
title: Site reboot
date: 2013-04-29
---

After a long hiatus, I've decided to revamp my personal website, and this blog
along with it.

I'm not sure when I first slapped up a website on this domain. It must be been
2003 at the latest, though. At the time, I was a graduate student in Philosophy
and my little head was filled with Classical Greek and Aristotle, with little
room for html. I believe the site consisted of a bunch of hastily assembled
html files, probably versioned by sending them occasionally to my own email
account. I wish I'd kept the files, even though I'm sure they would make me
cringe now. Later, I added a WordPress blog that I used for teaching purposes.
I probably also started using PHP at some point to glue page fragments together
so that I wouldn't have to copy and paste too much.

When I left graduate school in 2008 with the ambition of writing code for a
living, the first thing I did as a learning exercise was to rewrite the site
using Django, the Python web framework. This version of the site had a custom
blog and a place for me to post links. The code wasn't especially good, but it
wasn't bad as a beginner effort, and I think it may even have helped me to land
my first job.

Fast forward to 2013. I wanted to redo my website partly just for the fun of
it, and partly because much of the content was embarrassingly out of date. But
I had also realized in the meantime that a dynamic website was probably
overkill for me, and that a static website would be extremely simple to host
and maintain. I also wanted to start blogging again, and I thought a static
website written in markdown would be the easiest way to let me spend even more
of my day in Emacs than I was already spending.

Since I've been especially interested in Haskell lately, I chose <a
href="http://jaspervdj.be/hakyll/">Hakyll</a> , a static website generator
written in Haskell, for this iteration of the site. It's been a delight.
Hakyll's documentation is excellent, and the maintainer is extremely responsive
on the mailing list. Indeed, he was so responsive that I managed to overcome my
shyness and have my first ever (admittedly very modest) pull request on github
accepted on the project. If you want to see how easy the entire thing was, the
code for the site is <a
href="https://github.com/christopheryoung/chrisyoung">here</a>.

So enjoy, and perhaps now that I have a shiny new site I'll be tempted to
write more often.
