---
title: 'Proust, again'
date: '2020-08-27'
tags: proust, literature
---

At the beginning of July I finished reading Proust's <em>In Search of Lost
Time</em> again, my fourth read through the book, and barring some unforseen
misfortune certainly not my last. What struck me this time, more than others:
Proust's extraordinary intellectual independence in many of the subjects he
mentions; how well Proust's aesthetic discussions, of painting and music and
literature, teach us to read his book; the care he often takes (which I
certainly missed the first time around) to qualify the general claims Marcel
makes about love, friendship, and intimacy. I was also struck by how much
Proust struggles at times within the confines of a first person narrative ---
or is this part of a deliberate design, to serve a purpose? At any rate,
beginning very notably in <em>Swann's Way</em>, Marcel tells us things he could
not possibly know, with the omniscience of a third person narrator, and
sometimes with the thinnest of excuses.

The book is long but it is very memorable. The fourth time through was a slow
meditation, made more challenging by the distractions and worries of the
pandemic. In spite of my generally poor memory, there are no passages in the
book at this point that I would not immediately recognize if someone read me
one at random, since everything he writes is so vivid and fresh and stamped
with his personality. If Proust had lived to finish his book and been unable to
resist stretching it another few thousand pages I would not hesitate to read it
as often as I do.

Proust and his narrator Marcel are in a number of ways objectionable and silly,
just like Plato, another author on whom I have lavished years of attention. But
no other authors I've discovered have come close to them in artistry or a sense
of depth that their works give me. So I'll keep reading both of them, over and
over, until I'm dead or too senile to read another page. My French lessons have
continued slowly over the pandemic too and someday I'll read Proust in the
original. Curse my stubborn teenage self for squandering years of French and
hours of spare time in which to learn it.
