---
title: Asymmetries in the Current Canada-US Conflict
date: '2025-03-08'
tags: canada canada_us_relations
---

The obvious asymmetry in the current Canada-US conflict is that the US is in a
position to inflict far more pain on Canada than Canada can inflict on the US.

But this isn't the only asymmetry in the conflict. Thanks to Trump's alarming
rhetoric and a steady stream of insults, Canadians are *highly* focused on the
threat, unified, angry, and braced for pain. There is very little grassroots
appetite on the American side for a conflict with Canada. Rather, Americans are
either only dimly aware of this issue as one of about a hundred that are
currently in the news, horrified and embarrassed by Trump, or fine with a
little shakedown of their neighbor as long as it doesn't disrupt their own
lives. But it certainly will if it drags on much longer. The main focus of this
last group is high inflation and high prices. But this makes for a notable
asymmetry in the pain tolerance of the two parties to the dispute. If the
conflict escalates further, even modest negative net consequences may well
backfire on Trump before Canada backs down, even if Canada suffers far more
damage.

And that's the third asymmetry here: Canadians really *can't* back down much,
having been backed into an extremely unpleasant corner. Canada will be looking
for constructive ways to manage this threat, and will likely end up making
concessions, including painful ones. But it's obvious that the stakes are
higher now than compromise on any one issue. The sovereignty and viability of
the country is suddenly rudely the focus of the conversation, and that makes
substantial compromise harder than it would otherwise be on any of the issues
that Trump is pretending to care about.

American Trump haters are mostly aware to some extent of how this is playing in
Canada. I see occasional mentions of the view from Canada on the Democratic
side of US social media and liberal-leaning American news, so it's not
impossible to get some sense of things. But I suspect very few Americans
understand how profoundly enraging this bullshit is for Canadians and how much
long term damage Trump's regime is doing to relations between the countries. To
take an example almost entirely at random,
[here](https://snarky.ca/why-i-wont-be-attending-pycon-us-this-year/) is a post
by Brett Cannon, a very well-known and highly respected figure in the Python (a
programming language) community, explaining why he will be skipping PyCon US
for the first time since 2003. I hope that a better understanding of the view
from Canada will gradually percolate through personal and professional networks
through messages like this, since with everything going on even well-informed
American critics of Trump are likely to underestimate the consequences.
