---
title: 'Shredding Your Constitution in a New York Minute'
date: '2025-02-09'
tags: trump, constitutional_crisis
---

I write letters to politicians and they usually retaliate by putting me on
their mailing list. Sometimes I stay subscribed, just to see how they present
themselves to the public without the filter of the press. This is likely how I
ended up on Senator Kirsten Gillibrand's "Kirsten's New York Minute"
newsletter.

Gillibrand, who was first appointed to her seat to fill Clinton's vacancy, won
re-election just last year, running unopposed in the primary. She therefore
occupies a position that is about as safe as it gets in this age of reversals
and shifting political fortunes, not needing to face voters until 2030. She ran
for president in 2020, dropping out fairly early after failing to gain much
traction. Still, you gotta have *some* gumption to run for president, right?
Put this all together and you'd expect someone both ambitious and in a position
to take some risks.

If Gillibrand is taking risks these days, she's being very modest about it. For
as long as I've been subscribed to it, her newsletter has described activities
and interests more suitable for an obscure congressperson with a work-to-rule
attitude than a senator from New York. Her response to the Trump
administration's first few weeks continues in the same comotose spirit, which
is remarkable considering the stakes.

Last week's newsletter (January 31st) devoted one of six items to Trump. The
item titled "Combating chaos" complains that Trump "caused complete chaos" for
New Yorkers. Her response was to *call* on the Trump administration to reverse
the spending freeze. That was all the comment she felt necessary to offer on
Trump's first week and a half in power. Yesterday's newsletter (February 8th)
devoted two of seven items to Trump: First, she complains that the hiring
freeze "is playing games with Americans' retirements benefits" on the grounds
that staffing shortages are likely to disrupt the provision of benefits. Her
response? A press conference "urging" Trump to reverse his decision. The second
item is another complaint about the funding freeze, culminating in this
hilariously anti-climatic passage: "Thatâ€™s why Kirsten is fighting back. This
week, she held a press conference to sound the alarm about the disastrous
impact that a funding freeze would have on New Yorkers and called on the
president to immediately reverse course."

Fighting back indeed. Gillibrand seems to assume that Trump's moves since
taking power a second time are basically conventional, if aggressive, moves on
a familiar political board, to be countered by conventional moves on her part.
If she really thinks this, she must have thought Biden and Harris were full of
shit when they warned that Trump's intentions were closer to upturning the
board itself.

I take a more pessimistic view of what Trump is up to. I'm with the people who
think we're entering the critical phase of a full-blown constitutional crisis.
The Trump administration has made clear that it will not be respecting the
jurisdiction of the courts when things don't go its way. It has announced its
intention to ignore Congress. It's clear that the Democratic strategy depends
heavily on the courts, and that their main reservation about this strategy is
the glacial speed they work at. But even if they worked quickly we'd be fucked.
Whether this has sunk in yet for Democratic politicians, they have so far
decided to be pretty quiet about it in public.

What to do? I don't know. I pretty clearly have terrible political instincts,
but it seems to me that the first thing Gillibrand could do with her platform
is to *tell the truth* about what is happening. The woefully incomplete
descriptions she offers of the current moment in her newsletter could have been
written by Republican operatives, in framing her disagreement with Trump as
politics as usual. Trump's pardons of insurrectionists together with the
withdrawal of security details for enemies is a prospective threat of political
violence, and profoundly destabilizing to the political order. It's not
politics as usual. Call it what it is. The sudden cuts to congressionally
created and funded agencies violate the separation of powers and are
unspeakably cruel not just to New Yorkers but to vulnerable foreigners. Have
the courage to say it. (And to avoid any mention of foreigners in these
contexts supports Trump's cynical assumption that people are unable to see any
value, prudential or moral, in saving lives overseas, however cheaply.)

Besides telling the truth, it's also time to withhold *all* cooperation from an
administration clearly committed in advance to breaking the law when it suits
it, to resist it at every turn and in every way. Gillibrand has not mentioned
Musk or his DOGE specifically. This may be because she voted to confirm Scott
Bessent for Secretary of the Treasury, and Bessent promptly turned around and
gave Musk access to the Treasury Department's payment system, and so creating a
good deal of the "chaos" Gillibrand then complained vaguely and ineffectively
about. She should have known better. Bessent, a competent Yalie who got his
start in politics fundraising for Al Gore may be better than average for a
Trump cabinet pick, but he's still someone willing to serve Trump, and as his
conduct *immediately* showed, that one fact ought to have dominated
Gillibrand's assessment of him.
