---
title: '2025 Reading'
date: '2026-01-01'
tags: books
---

I only read 37 books in 2025, but I suppose that's partly because I read a lot
of academic papers. I'd like to write more often and in more depth about my
reading in 2026, including about the academic papers I'm reading. For 2025,
I'll just do a quick review.

As for fiction, as [mentioned
earlier](https://chrisyoung.net/prose/blog/posts/2025-02-08_recently_read/), I
read Delaney's ***Babel-17*** with high hopes, but didn't enjoy it very much.

By contrast, Robert Harris's ***Imperium*** was a really fun take on the early
part of Cicero's political career, told from the point of view of Tiro, his
trusted slave. I'm not familiar with much of Cicero's biography, so I'm not
sure how historically accurate it is, but it's certainly suspensful and
interesting throughout. I've always meant to read more historical fiction and
this was a nice start.

In anticipation of a trip (sadly cancelled) to Montreal, I reread Mordecai
Richler's ***The Apprenticeship of Duddy Kravitz***, a great Canadian classic.
Recommended if you want a glimpse of Montreal's past or you appreciate a
well-drawn anti-hero.

Still trying to open myself up to more SciFi, I read VanderMeer's
***Annihilation***. It was good enough to finish, but it didn't blow me away
either. Maybe the problem was me, though, and not the book.

Miranda July's ***All Fours*** has gotten a lot of attention since it was
published in 2024. I read it partly because of the buzz, but also because I
remember loving her book of short stories, ***No One Belongs Here More Than
You***, when I read it years ago. ***All Fours*** was an uncomfortable read for
me in some ways, since the author's way of looking at the world is so different
from my own (absurdly, I find fiction that features dishonesty hard to take
sometimes), but it was also real and arresting enough in spite of all that for
me to read it. Now that half a year has elapsed since I finished it, I can see
it's passing the "this book stayed with you" test. I might reread it in a
decade.

I read Pezeshkzad's ***Hafez in Love***, a fictionalized account of a few
episodes in the life of Hafez Shirazi, the great(est) Persian poet. I enjoyed
this less than I expected---I think the poetry and its assumptions and
conventions must not translate well, at least into my brain.

I finally read my first Terry Pratchet, ***Night Watch***. It was silly and fun
and I'll read more from him but I think I also understand where the minority of
haters is coming from. It is not subtle, that's for sure.

I gobbled up Susan Minot's 1989 ***Lust and Other Stories***, the collection
held together by the theme of disappointed expectations and romantic
misadventures. Her voice reminded me a little of Lorrie Moore's, but still all
her own.

I finally read (it's been on my shelf forever and I kept meaning to get to it)
David Gutterson's ***Ed King***, a modernization of Oedipus Rex. It was fun,
but not among my favourite reworkings of classical texts. Will not reread.

Since I read Ted Chiang's wonderful ***Stories of Your Life and Others*** I've
been looking forward to ***Exhalation***, his follow up collection of stories.
This I finally got to in 2025. His stories are wonderful and I will absolutely
be rereading both volumes.

Finishing up English fiction, I read Amie Barrodale's ***You Are Having a Good
Time***. These are dark, funny, perfectly told stories. After I finished the
first story, I put her novel on hold at the library. Great stuff.

Moving onto English non-Philosophical non-Fiction, I read Kate Conger and Ryan
Mac's ***Character Limit: How Elon Musk Destroyed Twitter***. This is a nearly
500 page blow-by-blow account of Elon Musk's takeover of Twitter. If you were
glued to your screen during these events (as I was), then little of it will be
new to you. If you weren't glued to your screen, then this book might be too
much. Or perhaps not. The story has an obvious relevance beyond Twitter, since
Musk's takeover of Twitter both helped Trump win the election and enhanced (in
some circles) Musk's reputation for extreme but effective organizational
makeovers. So the book is important background reading for DOGE and Musk's
dismantling of American state capacity.

If there's a thesis to the book it's that Musk saw Twitter as "a knot of
technical issues that a great engineering mind like himself could easily
untangle, enabling the growth of free speech in the digital town square. But at
its core, Twitter was plagued by social and political dilemmas, not merely
technological ones." In the book, Musk spends a lot of time running around
urging people to be hardcore. And although he repeatedly loses the respect and
trust of people who could help him achieve his own goals, many people do their
very best to meet his high standards. Indeed, Musk does seem to have a sort of
genius for convincing very smart and driven people to ignore their family,
their health, and their other interests in order to pursue his own vision.
Since he seems profoundly unlikable on the page and screen, I assume he is very
charismatic in person, as least when he chooses to be.

Is Musk *himself* hardcore? He certainly works very long hours, much longer
than most people could manage. Beyond that, it's hard to see that he really is.
Some of the examples in the book are jaw-dropping, even if you already knew the
outlines. Prior to his purchase of Twitter, Musk failed to sign an NDA or do
basically any due diligence. So he couldn't even look at Twitter's financial
projections until it was too late. People negotiating with Musk "could hardly
believe their luck. They knew they were dealing with a slippery character and
angled for an agreement that placed all the legal risk on the buyer". Musk
starting talking about "due diligence" *after* he signed the deal. "But the
period for due diligence was long gone." (For people following this in real
time, the best commentary was surely Matt Levine's.) At one point
post-purchase, Twitter staff tries to explain the company to Musk as he listens
respectfully and asks probing questions. But the thoughtful questions are
hardly redeeming in context: "And they [the Twitter employees] recalled that
when Musk and his bankers went and pitched potential investors on backing his
acquisition of Twitter, leaked presentation decks reported by the media said
that Musk's company would bring in $12 billion in annual advertising revenue,
more than double its current clip, by 2028. If he was just learning how Twitter
kept the lights on, what were his figures based on?"

The authors of the book don't even pretend to be dispassionate about their
subject. They repeatedly describe him in unflattering ways: ". . . Musk needed
to vent and [posting] was his way of throwing his toys out of the crib when he
didn't get what he wanted". Or: "And while Musk posted like a twelve-year-old
off his Ritalin . . .". Or: "They'd appeased him, plying him with reams of data
like a mother offering different pacifiers to a fussy toddler". And so on. I am
sure that many wealthy people in tech dismissed the book and its reporting as
just more hostility from reporters, ones whose day job is (damningly) at the
NYT---if they noticed the book at all. But looking back at the dysfunctional,
chaotic, failure of DOGE, there is no book or reporting I know of that would
have better prepared someone to predict how it would go. Wealthy tech haters of
the NYT would do well to chew on that (they won't).

George Szirtes's ***The Photographer at Sixteen*** was an account of his
mother's tragic life, an exercise in imagination and empathy. This was worth
reading but did not quite live up to my expectations, and I didn't hold onto my
copy for further rereading. A very young (pre-famous) David Bowie makes an
unexpected cameo at one point.

Moving on, I read Carlo Rovelli's little ***Seven Brief Lessons on Physics***.
They were indeed brief---to brief to really teach much, I think.

Chris Voss's ***Never Split the Difference*** was published several years ago,
but for some reason seemed to get a flurry of attention in 2025. Several people
I know were all reading it and recommending it to each other. The author was a
negotiator for the FBI and the book promises to teach you some of his tricks. I
don't think I learned too much from it because I already have a pretty worked
out (and overlapping) view of negotiation. What I appreciate about Voss is his
emphasis (even in the most adversarial of negotiations) on empathy and building
understanding.

I finally read Tetlock and Gardner's ***Superforcasting***. I also didn't learn
much from this book, but I think the reason for that must be that I had already
absorbed so much of it by osmosis from other people I read. It's had an
enormous impact on some corners of the internet that I frequent. The basic idea
is that a lot of experts are very poor at predicting the future; that most
predictions people make don't effectively operationalize the issue in question
so are too vague to even assess; that in fact it is possible to do better or
worse at prediction over time; that doing it well matters; that some people
(usually non-experts!) do in fact do it well pretty consistently; and that we
can learn from them how to do it better. These are all excellent points, in my
opinion, and so-called superforecasters do indeed have much to teach the rest
of us. So even though I didn't encounter any new ideas here, it was nice to see
them all pulled together, and am happy to recommend this book.

Caleb Campbell's ***Disarming Leviathan: Loving Your Christian Nationalist
Neighbor*** is not my usual fare. I'm an atheist raised by atheists in Canada,
who has only lived in the U.S. in left-liberal places (or at least, moved in
left-liberal circles in those places). So my *direct* (knowing) contact with
Christian Nationalists is basically nil. And my view of Christianity is
something like bewildered incomprehension, so I was not in the target audience
for a book squarely addressed to Christians. (I found the book via Seumas
MacDonald's
[substack](https://jeltzz.substack.com/p/disarming-leviathan-loving-your-christian),
which I found via MacDonald's wonderful [online
courses](https://thepatrologist.com/shop/), when I studied Latin online during
the pandemic.) I read the book because although I don't have any (knowing)
daily contact with Christian nationalists, I am very much at the mercy of their
political choices. And I was curious to hear the author's strategies for
dealing with people who start from what seem like shared premises and end up in
a terrible place.

Campbell describes Christian nationalism as "a movement that calls Christian
followers to take government power at all costs to advance their preferred way
of being in the world". Christian nationalism "is a false gospel, a
leader-driven movement seeking power and influence by indoctrinating its
followers, preying on their fear, and leveraging their religious devotion." It
operates like a cult and encourages us/them thinking. He finds it unChristian
and admits to feeling a lot of anger and disappointment with friends and
members of the Church who fall into this way of thinking. Campbell makes the
point that the best attitude for him to take to it is to see Christian
nationalists as his mission field. Some missionaries travel to exotic locations
and learn foreign cultures, but there is also value in seeing your own culture
and its foreign mindsets as a legitimate (and difficult!) mission field as
well.

The first part of the book was not very useful to me, though I suppose
necessary. It is devoted to characterizing the mission field so that readers
understand what they're dealing with. He describes Christian Nationalism in
some detail and tries to distinguish it from Christian conservativism. I could
quibble here and there with some of his descriptions, but this was mostly
preaching to the converted (modulo all of our background differences of
opinion).

The second part of the book was more interesting to me. It goes through
strategies for empathizing, listening respectfully, and provoking deeper
engagement with faith in a way intended to sow the seeds of doubt in Christian
Nationalism. He points out that we rarely change our minds because someone got
off a good zinger at our expense or out-argued us. The author himself
understands conversions, since he was himself a neo-Nazi skinhead as a teenager
(!). There are some good examples in the book that would be useful to
Christians having these tough conversations. I'm probably not the one to be
having them---it's too easy to dismiss a foreign-born atheist from within the
Christian Nationalist world view. Christians, get to work on your friends and
neighbours. We need you.

I worked on my French this year by reading Annie Ernaux's ***La Place***.
Actually, I've been chipping away at this short book for years, often starting
over and retracing my steps, but only pushed through and finished it in 2025.
This is a great book for a beginner in French, because Ernaux's spare style
works well for new learners while also being stylistically interesting in its
own right. The book is about her father's life, so different from her own, and
the inevitable distance between them. Recommended. I read a lot of other French
this year (including news) but don't seem to have finished any other books.

For Italian, I read the beginner book by Capilli, ***Le Avventure Di Paul A
Roma***. This did what was advertised on the tin: gave me a story to follow in
Italian, with fairly simple vocabulary and notes. I've also already [mentioned
in another
post](https://chrisyoung.net/prose/blog/posts/2025-12-14_cuconato_on_quinean_indispensability_and_commitment/)
Cuconato's book on ontological commitment. I also read Jhumpa Lahiri's ***In
Altre Parole***, her first book written in Italian. Lahiri (a celebrated writer
in English) describes in this book her infatuation with Italian and her various
attempts to learn it. She now lives in Rome and publishes mostly in Italian.
This was just great. In addition to being a solid account of learning a
language, it has a series of worthwhile reflections about her relationship with
Bengali and English as well as Italian.

For German I read two similar beginner books, Klein's ***Dino Lernt Deutsch***
and Richard and Rawlings's ***Short Stories in German***. Of these, I preferred
the Klein, though all these beginner books seem to be pretty dull. The Richard
and Rawling stories were strange and unsatisfying (though your ymmv---online
the book seems to have some admirers). I read it twice to cement vocabulary and
was just sick of it by the time I was done.

My Classical Greek reading group wrapped up Plato's ***Gorgias*** in 2025
(we're now onto Plato's ***Protagoras***). I've been reading and rereading the
***Gorgias*** since I took Brad Inwood's wonderful seminar on the book in
1996(ish). It's my go-to recommendation for people interested in Plato or even
just in philosophy in general. (Get the Zeyl translation published by Hackett.
It's excellent.) I also read and enjoyed Seumas MacDonald's ***Ὁ ἐπὶ Τροίᾱν
Πόλεμος***, a retelling of the Trojan war in basic Greek.

In philosophy, I've already
[mentioned](https://chrisyoung.net/prose/blog/posts/2025-02-08_recently_read/)
Ney's ***Metaphysics: An Introduction*** and Smith's wonderful ***An
Introduction to Formal Logic***. I'm rereading Smith now, actually. Another fun
introductory read was Papineau's ***Philosophical Devices: Proofs,
Probabilities, Possibilities, and Sets***---I only wanted it to be longer. I
read and enjoyed Greg Frost-Arnold's ***Free Logic***, but won't say anything
about it now, since I hope to write something about it in 2026 after I reread
it.

I wrapped up my tour through Descartes's philosophical work with ***The
Philosophical Writings of Descartes, Volume 3***. This volume contains his
correspondence. Why I do dislike Descartes so much? It can't be the strange
views, since I happily put up with Plotinus and other wierdos. It can't be that
he's a jerk, since I've spent years reading Schopenhauer. Anyway, I'm still
waiting for something to click here and to start enjoying Descartes. I did
enjoy Gaukroger's ***Descartes: An Intellectual Biography*** more than you'd
expect considering the subject.

I read Feferman and Feferman's ***Alfred Tarski: Life and Logic***. I think I
got enough of the life but would have loved even more of the logic---that's a
statement of preference not a knock on the book, which is after all a
biography. Stewart's ***Infinity - A Very Short Introduction*** was worthwhile
and helped me take my first baby steps into this area.

I read two books back-to-back on the Vienna Circle: Edmonds' ***The Murder of
Professor Schlick*** and Sigmund's ***Exact Thinking in Demented Times***. Both
were worthwhile, though I think I preferred Edmonds's a bit more. Both books
need to cover an enormous amount of ground quickly, which means compressed
accounts of complex ideas. Sometimes this goes off the rails, mainly in
Sigmund's book. Sigmund's gloss of Kant's categorical imperative (p. 269) was
very sloppy, for example. He collapses it into the single universal law
formulation and then says "or, in simpler terms, 'Do X only if you like the
idea of everyone doing X." Look, I understand the author needs to cover a lot
of ground quickly, but this seems worse than simply leaving it unexplained. The
core of the universal law formulation is surely the maxim, which concerns the
*reason* for which we act. The reasons for which rational agents act need to be
universalizable in the sense that the maxims need to be consistent. But that
doesn't mean you should avoid getting a coffee at the shop because if everyone
got a coffee at the shop all at once billions would be crushed to death. And
here is Sigmund on Tarski on truth: "His idea mirrored the commonsensical
correspondence theory of truth. For example, the statement 'Fido is barking' is
true if and only if Fido is indeed barking. In this example, a higher-level
statement—namely, 'The following is true'—is applied to a lower-level
statement—namely, 'Fido is barking.' Formally, this act linking two distinct
linguistic levels requires a metalanguage, like those that Rudolf Carnap was
developing at the time." This seems very muddled. For starters (and only for
starters), the two distinct linguistic levels don't require a third level, the
metalanguage. The higher of the two is the metalanguage relative to the lower.
And the relationship between the correspondence theory of truth and Tarski's
convention T is *much* slippier than this.

Finally, I read Jody Azzouni's *Ontology Without Borders* slowly while taking
extensive notes. But this is such a rich, perplexing book that I'm not done
with it and I hope to be writing about it and other work by Azzouni in 2026 so
you'll have to wait for that.
